Programmes and Clusters news | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
About us
Programmes & Clusters
Programmes and Clusters news
Reinforcing expertise in safe and dignified burials during outbreaks
29 November 2024
In a milestone for regional public health, Dakar hosted its first regional Safe and Dignified Burial (SDB) training, gathering 30 participants from 10 African countries. Organized by the WHO Emergency Hub, the training marks the hub’s emergence as a regional reference centre for strengthening the capacity of national and regional experts in managing public health emergencies.
Read more »
New step in African region’s efforts to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HI...
27 November 2024
Brazzaville –
The World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Africa has launched a Regional Validation Committee for the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B virus, marking a pivotal moment in ensuring a healthier future for every mother and child across Africa.
The Regional Validation Committee has a crucial task of verifying the content, validity and quality of the national validation reports towards the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of the three infections.
Read more »
Ghana to Host Regional Simulation Exercise to Boost Outbreak Preparedness and Respon...
09 November 2024
To strengthen regional readiness for infectious disease outbreaks, the World Health Organization (WHO), in collaboration with United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP), Médicins sans frontières (MSF), and the Ghana Armed Forces (GAF), will lead a comprehensive simulation exercise in Ghana from November 11 to 15, 2024. This joint initiative, with participation from Ghana and other selected African countries, will support capacities for public health emergency preparedness and response by deploying innovative rapid-response health facilities capable of effectively managing high-risk outbreaks.
Read more »
WHO Equips Journalists to Spotlight Critical Health Insights from 2023 Ghana's STEPS...
06 November 2024
In public health, data serves as a critical foundation for understanding challenges and making informed decisions. Without clear, accurate information, it’s difficult for individuals and communities to take meaningful action, and policymakers to devise and implement effective solutions. Recognizing this need, the World Health Organization (WHO), in collaboration with Ghana’s Ministry of Health, organized a media training ahead of the Ghana STEPS Survey 2023 report launch to ensure its findings are communicated to Ghanaians in accessible and impactful ways.
Read more »
HIV and Hepatitis Program Managers meet in Kampala to discuss how to close gaps in p...
28 October 2024
Ministries of Health representatives from sixteen countries , WHO and partner organizations (including civil society and community representatives) convened in Kampala, Uganda from 28 October to 01 November to discuss how to close gaps in programmes and integrate NCDs and Mental Health services.
Read more »
WHO Supports Civil Society Organizations to Address Gender-Based Health Inequities t...
18 October 2024
Achieving Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires addressing gender inequalities and intersecting key social determinants of health, which deeply drive poor population health outcomes. Bridging health inequality gaps, particularly those related to gender, is essential for ensuring that data is effectively used and that advocacy drives evidence-based actions. This approach is crucial in improving health outcomes for all, leaving no one behind in the pursuit of equitable healthcare.
Read more »
Forging Resilience: WHO AFRO Establishes Independent Expert Body to Bolster Africa's...
17 July 2024
In a major step towards strengthening health security in the African Region, the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Africa (AFRO) has established an Emergency Preparedness & Response Technical Advisory Group (EPR-TAG). This independent body serves as the principal advisory group to WHO AFRO for strategic guidance on all matters pertaining to public health emergency preparedness and response.
Read more »
African health leaders begin work on roadmap to reshape global health financing on t...
13 June 2024
More than 80  ministry of health experts, regional and global partners and civil society representatives have set in motion the development of a roadmap to catalyse action to reshape the health financing ecosystem in Africa, and make it fit-for-purpose towards 2030 and beyond.
Read more »
New framework launched to eliminate visceral leishmaniasis in eastern Africa
12 June 2024
A new, comprehensive framework has been launched to guide health authorities, policy-makers and other stakeholders towards elimination of visceral leishmaniasis (VL) as a public health problem in eastern Africa.
Also known as kala-azar, VL is a deadly parasitic disease that causes fever, weight loss, spleen and liver enlargement, and – if untreated – death. Transmitted by the bite of infected female sandflies, VL is endemic in 80 countries around the world. In 2022, eastern Africa accounted for 73% of global VL cases, half of which occurred in children aged under 15 years.
Read more »