Ebola Disease | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Health topics
Ebola Disease
Ebola Disease
Overview
Ebola diseases (EBOD) are rare, but severe and often fatal viral diseases that affects humans and other primates. There are six species in the genus Ebolavirus, three of which (Bundibugyo, Sudan and Zaire) have previously caused large outbreaks. Ebolaviruses are transmitted to people from wild animals such as fruit bats, porcupines and non-human primates. They spread in the human population through direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g., bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.
The first cases of Ebola diseases were detected in two concomitants outbreaks in Sudan and in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) in 1976. Since then there have been several outbreaks in many countries. Outbreaks have since occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Guinea, Liberia, Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Uganda. In Africa, imported cases have also been found in Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and South Africa. The 2014–2016 outbreak in West Africa was the largest and most complex ever recorded, with widespread cases and a heavy death toll.
Ebola case fatality rates have varied from 25% to 90% in past outbreaks. However, with the currently available effective treatment, patients have a significantly higher chance of survival if they are treated early and given supportive care.
Sudan virus disease (SVD)
Symptoms
Ebola diseases symptoms can be sudden. They include fever, fatigue, muscle, pain, headache and sore throat. This is followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function, and in some cases internal and external bleeding (e.g., oozing from the gums, blood in the stool). Laboratory findings include low white blood cell and platelet counts and elevated liver enzymes.
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish Ebola diseases symptoms from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever and meningitis. A range of diagnostic tests have been developed to confirm the presence of the virus.
The incubation period, that is, the time interval from infection with the virus to onset of symptoms, is from 2 to 21 days. A person infected with an Ebolavirus cannot spread the disease until they develop symptoms.
Treatment
Supportive care—rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids—and treatment of specific symptoms improves survival. A range of potential treatments including blood products, immune therapies and drug therapies are currently being evaluated.
During the 2018–2020 Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak caused by Zaire ebolavirus in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the first-ever multi-drug randomized control trial was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of drugs used in the treatment of EVD patients under an ethical framework developed in consultation with experts in the field and the DRC.
Two monoclonal antibodies (Inmazeb and Ebanga) were approved for the treatment of Zaire ebolavirus infection in adults and children by the US Food and Drug Administration in late 2020.
Situation reports
* Ebola disease situation reports are now included in The WHO Africa outbreaks and emergencies bulletin.
Subscribe to External Situation Reports
Please fill in your details below to receive our weekly outbreaks and other health emergencies bulletin
First Name
Last Name
Email (required)
Organisation
Title/Position
Additional Information
Building the legacy of Ebola: Survivors, health systems, and a blueprint for research and development
Frequently asked questions on Ebola disease vaccine
Knowledge resources for Ebola
National plan for the response to the Ebola virus disease epidemic in North Kivu province
Ebola Response Report 2016
Featured news
View all →
26 April 2025
Uganda declares end of Ebola outbreak
06 December 2024
Sierra Leone launches Ebola vaccination drive for frontline health workers
20 February 2024
Preventive Ebola vaccination safeguards health workers in Democratic Republic of the Congo
23 August 2023
Halting the spread of Ebola through sexual transmission
Multimedia
Featured publications
WHO Regional Strategic Ebola Virus Disease Readiness Preparedness Plan
On 3 May 2018, the Provincial Health Division of Equateur, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) reported 21 cases of fever with haemorrhagic signs including 17 community deaths in the Ikoko-Impenge Health Area in this region. The Ministry of Health in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) notified WHO Country Office of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in Bikoro health zone, Equateur province on 8 May 2018. As of 2 June 2018, there are a total of 53 cases (37 confirmed, 13 probable, 3 suspect) with 25 deaths.
The ongoing outbreak poses a significant risk of spread to countries neighbouring the DRC. On the basis of proximity to the current outbreak and the current capacity of the health system to cope with EVD, WHO has prioritized 9 countries neighbouring DRC.
The recommendations of Preparedness Support Team missions, results of EVD Preparedness checklist and the Joint External Evaluation (JEE) have been taken into account in identifying gaps in 7 countries out of 9. JEE has not been carried out in ROC and CAR where the outcome of EVD preparedness checklist was used to underscore the priority actions of preparedness.