News Releases | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
News Releases
State-of-the-art laboratory enhances Madagascar’s polio response
14 July 2025
Antananarivo
– A new state-of-the-art laboratory has bolstered Madagascar’s efforts to survey and detect polioviruses and effectively respond to the threat of the disease and protect children from its devastating impacts.
The laboratory, which is fully accredited by World Health Organization (WHO), was handed over today to the national authorities. Hosted at the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar in the capital, Antananarivo, the laboratory reinforces the country’s position as a regional pillar in rapid poliovirus detection and outbreak response.
Read more »
Health leaders commit to accelerate action against severe chronic diseases in Africa
10 July 2025
Abuja –
Health leaders, policymakers and development partners across Africa have renewed commitment to accelerate the implementation of the PEN-Plus strategy to significantly expand access to care for severe noncommunicable diseases (NCDs).
Read more »
Immunization experts urge stronger action to close vaccination gaps in Africa
04 July 2025
Brazzaville –
Experts, policymakers and global health partners have called for stronger, coordinated action to prevent backsliding on progress made against vaccine-preventable diseases in the African Region, where millions of children are still at risk.
Read more »
Senegal Introduces Hexavalent Vaccine into its National Immunization Programme
01 July 2025
Dakar -
On July 1, 2025, Senegal officially launched the introduction of the hexavalent vaccine into its Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI). Following in Mauritania's footsteps, Senegal is part of this regional dynamic of vaccine innovation. This vaccine is a combination that protects against six diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, hepatitis B, Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib), and poliomyelitis. It replaces the pentavalent and inactivated polio vaccines (IPV), previously administered separately.
Read more »
WHO collaborates with media managers in the fight against mpox in Sierra Leone
30 June 2025
Read more »
WHO supporting Guinea restore vaccine capacity after fire damage
28 June 2025
Conakry
- Following a fire accident at a vaccine depot in Guinea’s capital Conakry, World Health Organization (WHO) is supporting the authorities to devise urgent measures, including securing remaining vaccine stocks, to limit loss and prolonged impact of the damage.
A crisis cell has been set up and contingency plans are being reinforced.
Read more »
Together, Lesotho’s blood donors save lives
13 June 2025
Maseru ‒
One afternoon in May 2025, 48-year-old Lebohang Pitso* from Lesotho’s capital, Maseru, felt her life slipping away. Weakened from a bout of severe bleeding caused by cervical cancer, she sought emergency care at the city’s renowned Senkatana Oncology Clinic. A few hours after being admitted and receiving a blood transfusion, she felt a powerful transformation take place in her body.
“It was like a heavy cover was removed from my face,” she says. “The blood gave me life.”
Read more »
WHO, Nigeria’s TY Danjuma Foundation sign agreement to advance health
02 June 2025
Abuja
– World Health Organization (WHO) in the African Region and TY Danjuma Foundation have signed a landmark US$ 2.26 million agreement to strengthen Nigeria’s national health priorities over the next decade. The partnership, formalized today in Abuja, Nigeria, marks a significant step in leveraging African philanthropy to address the country’s health challenges.
Read more »
Professor Mohamed Yakub Janabi appointed WHO Regional Director for Africa
28 May 2025
The World Health Organization (WHO) Executive Board today appointed Professor Mohamed Yakub Janabi as Regional Director of WHO African Region following his nomination during a Special Session of the WHO Regional Committee for Africa held on 18 May 2025 in Geneva, Switzerland.
Read more »
Botswana leads the way in eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HIV
27 May 2025
In a historic global health milestone, Botswana has been validated as the first high HIV-burden country in the world, and the first in Africa, to reach the World Health Organization’s Gold Tier status for eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HIV as a public health issue.
Read more »