Neglected Tropical Diseases | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Health topics
Neglected Tropical Diseases
Neglected Tropical Diseases
Disease Outbreak
There is no Disease Outbreak data at this time
Related Health Topics
Buruli ulcer
Guinea-Worm Disease (Dracunculiasis)
Expanded Special Project for Elimination of Neglected Tropical Disease
Helminthiasis
Leishmaniasis
Leprosy
Lymphatic Filariasis
Onchocerciasis
Schistosomiasis (Bilharzia)
Skin NTD’s
Trachoma
Trypanosomiasis, African
Overview
Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) encompass 17 bacterial, parasitic and viral diseases that occur solely, or principally in tropical regions. They are often termed ‘neglected’ as the people who are most affected are the poorest populations living in rural areas, urban slums and conflict zones.
Related Links
Kuwait Fund and WHO in $4million multi-year agreement to tackle Neglected Tropical Diseases in Africa
Neglected Tropical Diseases can be eliminated in our lifetime:  A Call for Action
Guidelines for stopping mass drug administration and verifying elimination of human onchocerciasis
Human onchocerciasis (river blindness) is a disease of the skin and eye caused by Onchocerca volvulus, a parasitic worm transmitted by Simulium species (black flies) that breed in fast-flowing rivers and streams. The disease is endemic in 31 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, three countries in Latin America and in Yemen. Since 2013, the World Health Organization (WHO) has verified three countries in Latin America as free of human onchocerciasis.
Whilst nodulectomy and vector control have been implemented in the past, the current intervention strategy is based on mass drug administration (MDA) of ivermectin. In Africa, annual community-directed treatment with ivermectin is the main intervention in most areas except in a few foci where semi-annual treatment is implemented. In the Americas, semi-annual ivermectin treatment with a minimum coverage of 85% is the main intervention; recently, quarterly treatment has been implemented in some foci.
Guidelines for stopping mass drug administration and verifying elimination of human onchocerciasis
Featured news
View all →
18 April 2025
African health experts commit to accelerate efforts to eliminate Neglected Tropical Diseases
14 April 2025
New WHO report highlights progress in the fight against severe chronic diseases
24 February 2025
Sustaining efforts to end river blindness disease in Congo
30 January 2025
Communities mobilize to end Guinea-worm disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Multimedia
Featured publications
Understanding the PEN-Plus approach to care: expanding access to care for severe noncommunicable diseases in the WHO African Region
PEN-Plus contributes to reducing premature mortality from severe NCDs by providing integrated care and services among Africa's poorest children and young adults. The aim of PEN-Plus is to provide essential NCD services to alleviate the burden of unaddressed, severe NCDs among underserved populations in the African Region through decentralized outpatient services and integrated case management.
This document provides an overview of the PEN-Plus model currently being implemented in the WHO African Region, including its history, aims, recent progress and future directions. While primarily written for country partners and donors, the document is likely to be of interest to a broader range of individuals, organizations and agencies working to improve access to care for people living with severe noncommunicable diseases in Africa.
Events
The Mwele Malecela Mentorship Programme – Cohort II
Find out more
The Mwele Malecela Mentorship Program – Cohort I
16 August 2023
The Mwele Malecela Mentorship Programme for Women in Neglected Tropical Diseases (NT...
15 December 2022
ESPEN Luncheon: For an Africa free of Neglected Tropical Diseases
20 April 2017