Communicable Diseases | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Health topics
Communicable Diseases
Communicable Diseases
Disease Outbreak
There is no Disease Outbreak data at this time
Related Health Topics
HIV/AIDS
Immunization and Vaccines Development
Malaria
Neglected Tropical Diseases
Polio
Tuberculosis
Overview
Communicable, or infectious diseases, are caused by microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses, parasites and fungi that can be spread, directly or indirectly, from one person to another. Some are transmitted through bites from insects while others are caused by ingesting contaminated food or water.
A variety of disease-producing bacteria and viruses are carried in the mouth, nose, throat and respiratory tract. Conditions such as leprosy, tuberculosis (TB) and different strains of influenza (flu) can be spread by coughing, sneezing, and saliva or mucus on unwashed hands.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as HIV and viral hepatitis are spread through the exposure to infective bodily fluids such as blood, vaginal secretions and semen. Hepatitis is a significant concern in the African Region and the majority of people living with hepatitis B and C are unaware of their infections.
Insects play a significant role in the transmission of disease. Bites from
Anopheles
mosquitoes transmits malaria parasites that can wreak havoc on high-risk populations such as children under age 5 and pregnant women. Yellow fever has also seen resurgence due to reduced vaccination efforts. Many neglected tropical diseases are caused by unsafe water, poor housing conditions and poor sanitation in the Region.
Factsheet: Infectious diseases
Dengue and severe dengue
Dengue
Trachoma
Trachoma
Lymphatic filariasis
Lymphatic filariasis
Onchocerciasis
Onchocerciasis
Trypanosomiasis, human African (sleeping sickness)
Trypanosomiasis, human African (sleeping sickness)
Cholera
Cholera
Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Marburg haemorrhagic fever
Marburg haemorrhagic fever
Rift Valley fever
Rift Valley fever
Smallpox
Smallpox
Featured news
View all →
12 January 2024
WHO Africa, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation pursue collaboration to leverage data analytics to fight diseases
06 December 2023
Scaling up country support for NTD eradication
25 March 2021
Côte d'Ivoire eliminates sleeping sickness as a public health problem
Multimedia
There are no media at this time.
Featured publications
Responding to communicable and noncommunicable diseases: Progress report 2024
This is the third progress report produced by the UCN Cluster of the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Africa. Established in 2019 to better integrate disease management programmes within a health systems strengthening framework, the UCN Cluster is responsible for delivering the African Region’s strategic agenda of the Sustainable Development Goals–namely, universal health coverage, communicable and noncommunicable disease control, and the endgame strategies for neglected tropical diseases (NTDs).
Events
2nd International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2025)
Find out more
Regional Immunization Technical Advisory Group (RITAG) and Immunization Stakeholders...
11 June 2024
1st International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2024)
23 April 2024
Regional Immunization Technical Advisory Group (RITAG) and Immunization Stakeholders...
7 November 2023