Statements | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Statements
WHO supports Democratic Republic of the Congo reinforce efforts to diagnose disease ...
06 December 2024
Kinshasa –
World Health Organization (WHO) is deploying experts to support health authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo carry out further investigations to determine the cause of a yet undiagnosed disease that has been reported in Panzi, a locality in Kwango pro
Read more »
Sustaining mpox response in Africa as efforts begin bearing fruit
03 December 2024
While mpox remains a global threat—underscored by WHO’s declaration on 22 November 2024 that it continues to constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC)—in Africa, we are beginning to see signs that response efforts are paying off.
Read more »
Saddened by the passing of Dr Faustine Ndugulile, Regional Director-elect
27 November 2024
We are deeply saddened about the sudden and shocking news of the passing of Dr Faustine Ndugulile, Regional Director-elect of WHO’s Africa region.
Read more »
Empowering Girls Means Upholding Their Rights to Sexual and Reproductive Health
11 October 2024
Girls’ vision for the future, this year’s theme, conveys both the need for urgent action and persistent hope, driven by the power of girls’ voices and vision for the future. Girls around the world tell us they know progress is possible. After all, the world has more than halved child mortality since the 1990’s. Fifty million more girls are in school than in 2015.
Read more »
WHO condemns abduction of colleague in Mali
24 January 2023
Bamako
– World Health Organization (WHO) deplores the abduction of Dr Mahamadou Diawara, who was taken by unidentified assailants from his car on 23 January 2023 in the town of Menaka in northern Mali.
Dr Diawara, deployed by WHO in Menaka since the beginning of 2020, has been leading efforts to provide medical care to communities that are often remote and face insecurity risks and violence.
The driver of his car was also attacked, but the assailants left him behind and he is recovering from the incident.
Read more »
WHO statement on the clinical trial of CVO+ remedy
05 July 2021
The World Health Organization (WHO) reiterates that there is not yet a specific antiviral treatment whose safety and effectiveness are proven to treat COVID-19. Corticosteroids and medical oxygen remain essential in saving the lives of patients with severe cases of COVID-19.
Read more »
Ghana becomes recipient of historic first shipment of COVAX vaccines
24 February 2021
After a year of disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with more than 80,700 Ghanaians getting infected with the virus and over 580 lost lives, the path to recovery for the people of Ghana can finally begin.
Read more »
WHO supports scientifically-proven traditional medicine
04 May 2020
The World Health Organization (WHO) welcomes innovations around the world including repurposing drugs, traditional medicines and developing new therapies in the search for potential treatments for COVID-19.
Read more »
A second COVID-19 case is confirmed in Africa
25 February 2020
The Ministry of Health, Population and Hospital Reform of Algeria has reported the country’s first case of COVID-19. Health authorities report that tests indicate that an Italian adult, who arrived in the country on 17 February 2020 has tested positive for coronavirus disease.
Read more »
New milestone towards a polio-free world, but there is no time to relax
24 October 2019
In another historic step for humanity towards a world free of polio, an independent commission of experts today certified – on World Polio Day – that the second of three types of the wild poliovirus had been eradicated globally.
Read more »