1st International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2024) | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Media Centre
Events
1st International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2024)
1st International Conference
​​​​​​​on PEN-Plus in Africa
(ICPPA 2024)
23 - 25 April 2024, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania
1st International Conference
​​​​​​​on PEN-Plus in Africa
(ICPPA 2024)
23 - 25 April 2024, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania
Thank you ​​​​for joining us at ICPPA 2024!
The ICPPA provides a pivotal platform to explore collaborative opportunities to align the PEN-Plus initiative with other existing public health programmes in the region. Participants will include high-level policymakers, global and regional experts, donors, development partners, private sector representatives, civil society organizations and noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) focal points from Ministries of Health across the African region.
​​
​​​​​​​ICPPA 2024 Tracks
​​​​ICPPA 2024 Tracks
Track 1
Ending the Neglect of Noncommunicable Diseases (NCDs) across the life course in Africa
Track 2
Policy Frameworks and Strategies for Integrating NCD Interventions in Primary Health Care (PHC): from WHO PEN to PEN-Plus
Track 3
PEN-Plus Unveiled: Pioneering Regional Strategies, Opportunities, and Frontiers
Track 4
Engage, Empower, Excel: Community-Centric and Person-Centered NCD Care for All
Track 5
Rising to the challenge of NCDs financing in Africa
About the ICPPA 2024
The WHO Regional Office for Africa is organizing the 1st International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA), a high-level forum to accelerate and scale up the implementation of the PEN-Plus strategy in Africa.
About the PEN-Plus Strategy
The PEN-Plus strategy complements the WHO PEN intervention which aims to provide decentralized and geographically accessible quality care at community health centers to treat common NCDs. These include hypertension, type 2 diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases, as well as cervical cancer screening and palliative care. Although PEN-Plus also follows an integrated outpatient package delivery approach, it focuses on severe spectrum NCDs, such as type 1 diabetes, rheumatic and congenital heart disease, sickle cell disease, as well as palliative care for advanced malignancies.
While WHO PEN focuses on the primary health care facilities, PEN-Plus interventions expands to first-level referral facilities (i.e., district hospitals).  PEN-Plus includes training and mentorship of health workers to provide diagnosis, treatment, support, and referral for severe NCDs. It also equips health facilities with the necessary medical apparatus, supplies, and medicines to deliver quality care for these conditions. PEN-Plus follows a patient-centered, community-focused approach that involves the active participation of the patients and their families in the management of their diseases. PEN-Plus also integrates palliative care and psychosocial support for patients with severe NCDs and their caregivers.
Registration
Due to the high-demand for participation in the 1st ICPPA, in-person participation is by invitation only and is limited to 300 people. However, we are pleased to provide an online link to those who wish to engage virtually with the conference from April 23rd to April 25th, 2024.
Privacy Policy of WHO for ICPPA
Commitment to Privacy:
As the World Health Organization (WHO), we are deeply committed to protecting the privacy and security of your personal information. Understanding the importance of your data, we take significant measures to safeguard it while facilitating your participation in this event.
Purpose of Data Collection:
Your personal data is collected with the aim to:
Ensure a smooth and personalized experience at the event.
Communicate essential and relevant information about the event.
Continuously enhance the quality of our future events and services based on participant feedback and interactions.
Non-Disclosure of Data:
We adhere to a strict policy of not sharing your personal data with any external entities. Your information is for internal use only, pertaining directly to the event and its related activities.
Register
Provisional Agenda
Day 1 - 23 April
Day 2 - 24 April
Day 3 - 25 April
Day 1 - 23 April
Download Agenda for Day 1
Day 2 - 24 April
Download Agenda for Day 2
Day 3 - 25 April
Download Agenda for Day 3
Side events
What are the ICPPA side events?
ICPPA 2024 offers a unique opportunity for  captivating side events in line with the themes of the conference.  More to come on ICPPA side events and themes.
Call for abstracts
Overview
The maiden annual International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA) on chronic and severe non-communicable diseases provides a unique opportunity for public health leaders and scientists in Africa and beyond to reflect on latest research on non-communicable disease prevention and management, and to share lessons learnt on integrated health systems, forging the way forward to create robust health systems able to provide vital care for severe NCDs in Africa.
The WHO African Regional office in collaboration with the Helmsley Charitable Trust (HCT) and their partners invites researchers to showcase their work in line with  progress made on non-communicable diseases in Africa and beyond.
Call for Abstracts:
February 02, 2024
Deadline for Abstract Submission:
February 29
th
, 2024
Notification of Abstract Acceptance:
March 08
th
, 2024
Authors Registration Deadline:
March 22
nd
, 2024
Abstract submission guidelines
Topics: Abstracts will be accepted for the following conference tracks:
Track 1:
Ending the Neglect of Noncommunicable Diseases (NCDs) across the life course in Africa
Track 2:
Policy Frameworks and Strategies for Integrating NCD Interventions in Primary Health Care (PHC): from WHO PEN to PEN-Plus
Track 3:
PEN-Plus Unveiled: Pioneering Regional Strategies, Opportunities, and Frontiers
Track 4:
Engage, Empower, Excel: Community-Centric and Person-Centered NCD Care for All
Eligibility of Abstracts and Authors
Only abstracts with original work within the above tracks will be accepted for the conference. The abstract should not have been previously published or presented elsewhere. The primary author must have participated in the activities showcased in the abstract and obtained the necessary government approvals where sensitive data is used in the paper, as well as any necessary ethical clearance documents.
While a person may submit more than one abstract, only one abstract per person (primary author) will be accepted. Research should have been conducted within the last 5 years including landmark studies and must be relevant to the current African landscape.
Conflict of Interest: Authors of accepted abstracts will have to submit a disclosure of conflict-of-interest form that will be shared with the acceptance letter
Authors and Affiliations
Word count: The abstract should not exceed 350 words (which includes sub-headings but does not include the title, key words, list of authors and their addresses). Authors:
Authors should be listed as follows:
First author: Provide first name, initials of the middle name (if any), and the last name (e.g., John M. Kamara).
Co-authors: List each co-author in order of contribution by typing their first and middle names as initials, followed by their last name in full (e.g., J.K. Thompson, A.H. Karikari).
Provide the organizational affiliations of the first author and all co-authors
Indicate the corresponding author with an Asterix* and provide their email address and telephone number plus their alternate contacts.
Abstract Structure
Title: The title should be informative but concise with no subtitles or abbreviations/ acronyms. Write the title in sentence case and only capitalize proper nouns and scientific names where appropriate (e.g., Escherichia coli).
Introduction/Background: Address the scientific background and include the rationale for the study, as well as the public health significance of the subject. Explain why your study is important and what question(s) it will answer. A clearly stated background sets the stage and should include:
A brief description of the topic and its public health significance
Study objectives
Research questions or study hypothesis if applicable
Methods
Describe the methods used for the study. Essential points to be included are:
Study design
Study setting
Study population
Sample size and sampling methods
Eligibility criteria and case definitions, if any
Data collection, management and analysis
Results
Present the significant findings (both positive and negative) of the study that are directly related to the study objectives. This section should not include discussion of the results. Provide both absolute numbers and their percentages/proportions, rates and ratios where applicable. Please note that since an abstract is a stand-alone and citable document, the results section should contain data. It should not include such statements as “Data will be discussed.” If considerable work is still pending before the conference submission, please indicate that the results are preliminary.
Conclusion
Be as concise as possible. Do not re-state data that is already included in the results. This section may include:
An interpretation of key findings and their implications for public health practice
Public health actions that are recommended and/or have been implemented as a consequence of the study
Note: Changes cannot be made to the final abstract after it has been submitted. However, in the event that your abstract is selected for presentation and has undergone significant changes after acceptance, those changes should be highlighted in the abstract presentation or poster.
Key words
Please include 4-6 key words. Use terms listed in the
Medical Subject Headings
(MeSH) from the Index Medicus
Decisions and Next Steps: Accepted abstracts will be published in the conference book of abstracts. All selected abstract applicants for either oral or poster presentations are expected to attend the conference in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
For more information email the
ICPPA2024abstracts@who.int
Registration travel & scholarships
There is a limited number of scholarships available to cover travel and accommodation expenses. The scholarship will be awarded to individuals based on quality of abstracts submitted.
Decisions about scholarships would be made by the end of February 2024 prior to the Conference. Abstract authors whose abstracts are selected to receive a scholarship will be notified in March 2024 via email. If your abstract is selected, you will have 2 days to confirm your participation in case you are not granted the award of scholarship.
Frequently Asked Questions
When will I get response for the abstract I have submitted?
Applicants will be notified of their abstract acceptance by 08 March 2024 and must confirm participation within a week of notification.
Can I make edits to my abstract submission?
No, you cannot make edits to an abstract once it has been submitted. However, in the event that your work has undergone significant changes after acceptance, those changes should be included and highlighted in the abstract presentation.
Can I still submit an abstract after the deadline?
No, abstracts will not be accepted past the official due date. However, we encourage you to submit your abstract for consideration next year.
Do abstract presented need to attend and present in-person at the conference?
Yes, abstract presenters are expected to attend the conference in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania in person, if selected to give an oral or poster presentation.
Who can I contact for questions concerning my abstract submission?
For other inquiries or questions about your specific submission, please reach out to ICPPA2024abstracts@who.int, and include your submission ID, and the name and email of the one who submitted the abstract.
Click here to submit your abstract via the online submission portal
Resources
Call to action - Prioritizing a person-centred approach to chronic and severe noncommunicable diseases–type 1 diabetes, sickle cell disease and childhood heart diseases
PEN-Plus – a Regional Strategy to Address Severe Noncommunicable Diseases at First-Level Referral Health Facilities
Communicable and non-communicable diseases in Africa in 2021/22
Ending disease in Africa: responding to communicable and noncommunicable diseases, progress report 2020-2022
Ending disease in Africa: vision, strategies, and special initiatives, 2023-2030
Regional framework for integrating essential noncommunicable disease services in primary health care: report of the Secretariat
The Brazzaville Declaration on Noncommunicable Diseases Prevention and Control in the WHO African Region
HPV Vaccination: Paving the path toward Cervical Cancer elimination in Africa
Accelerating Cervical Cancer Elimination in Africa through Strengthened HPV Vaccination, Screening and Treatment
Other relevant documents
Save the date
eFlyer - Call for abstracts
ICPPA 2024 - Concept note
ICPPA 2024 abstract submission guidelines
ICPPA 2024 Magazine
PEN-Plus publications
Media
ICPPA is keen on engaging members of the press and encourages their involvement. If you wish to arrange for interviews ahead of ICPPA 2024 or have any other media inquiries, please contact the WHO Regional Office for Africa.
ICPPA Communications
Email:
ICPPA@who.int
Nadim Boughanmi, Communication Officer
Noncommunicable Diseases, WHO Regional Office for Africa
Email:
boughanmin@who.int​
23 April 2024