2nd International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2025) | WHO | Regional Office for Africa
Skip to main content
WHO Africa
Media Centre
Events
2nd International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2025)
2
nd
International Conference ​​​on PEN-Plus in Africa
(ICPPA 2025)
8 - 10 July 2025, Abuja, Federal Republic of Nigeria
Register
0
0
Days
0
0
Hours
Overview
The ICPPA provides a pivotal platform to explore collaborative opportunities to align the PEN-Plus initiative with other existing public health programmes in the region. Participants will include high-level policymakers, global and regional experts, donors, development partners, private sector representatives, civil society organizations and noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) focal points from Ministries of Health across the African region.
About the ICPPA 2025
July 8-10, 2025 | Abuja, Nigeria
The WHO Regional Office for Africa is pleased to announce that the second International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa (ICPPA 2025) will be held in the Federal Republic of Nigeria from July 8-10, 2025, in Abuja. This year’s ICPPA will be held under the theme:
"Advancing Implementation of PEN-Plus for Severe NCDs in Africa: Technical Innovations, Operational Insights, and Scalable Solutions."
Since our inaugural conference in 2024, countries have made progress in implementing the PEN-Plus strategy and scaling up life-saving care for people with severe NCDs. As of January 2025, 20 countries in the region were at different phases of implementing the PEN-Plus strategy. ICPPA 2025 will be a forum for countries to share best practices and innovative solutions to scale up PEN-Plus implementation.
ICPPA Virtual Participation
In-person participation in the 2nd ICPPA is by invitation only. However, we are pleased to provide an online link to those who wish to engage virtually with the conference from
July 8 to July 10, 2025
.
Privacy Policy of WHO for ICPPA
Commitment to Privacy:
As the World Health Organization (WHO), we are deeply committed to protecting the privacy and security of your personal information. Understanding the importance of your data, we take significant measures to safeguard it while facilitating your participation in this event.
Purpose of Data Collection:
Ensure a smooth and personalized experience at the event.
Communicate essential and relevant information about the event.
Continuously enhance the quality of our future events and services based on participant feedback and interactions.
Non-Disclosure of Data:
We adhere to a strict policy of not sharing your personal data with any external entities. Your information is for internal use only, pertaining directly to the event and its related activities.
Register Now
Provisional Agenda
Day 1 - 8 July
Day 2 - 9 July
Day 3 - 10 July
Day 1 - 8 July
⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠
Day 1
Download the agenda
Day 2 - 9 July
Day 2
Download the agenda
Day 3 - 10 July
Day 3
Download the agenda
ICPPA 2025 Highlights
Sessions selected for CIPPA 2025
Session 1
PEN-Plus in the WHO African region: Updates and progress towards regional targets
Parallel Session 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b
Country progress updates, operational insights, and lessons learned on PEN-Plus implementation
Session 4
Training and capacity building of the Health Workforce
Session 5
Medications, Diagnostics, and Technical Innovations in PEN-Plus
Session 6
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Operational Planning for Achieving the PEN-Plus Regional Strategy
Session 7
Case Finding and Strengthening Referral Pathways for PEN-Plus
Session 8
Scaling PEN-Plus: Financing and Sustainability: The role of government and partners
Session 9
Community and People-centered care – panel discussions
Session 10
Preparation for the 4th UN High-Level Meeting on NCDs (UNHLM-NCDS)
PEN-Plus explained
This video illustrates how PEN-Plus empowers local health workers through specialized training, provides essential resources, and delivers patient-centered care bringing crucial NCD services closer to home for people living in rural areas of sub-Saharan Africa. It calls for sustained efforts toward comprehensive action on NCDs.
Resources
ICPPA 2025 Call to action - Advancing Implementation of PEN-Plus for Severe NCDs in Africa: Technical Innovations, Operational Insights, and Scalable Solutions
Understanding the PEN-Plus approach to care: expanding access to care for severe noncommunicable diseases in the WHO African Region
First international conference on PEN-Plus in Africa, 2024
PEN-PLUS: Delivering Healthcare and Hope to People Living with Severe Noncommunicable Disease in Africa - Issue 2 of the PEN-Plus Magazine
Framework for the implementation of the Global diabetes compact in the WHO African Region
Call to action - Prioritizing a person-centred approach to chronic and severe noncommunicable diseases–type 1 diabetes, sickle cell disease and childhood heart diseases
PEN-Plus – a Regional Strategy to Address Severe Noncommunicable Diseases at First-Level Referral Health Facilities
Communicable and non-communicable diseases in Africa in 2021/22
Ending disease in Africa: responding to communicable and noncommunicable diseases, progress report 2020-2022
Ending disease in Africa: vision, strategies, and special initiatives, 2023-2030
Regional framework for integrating essential noncommunicable disease services in primary health care: report of the Secretariat
The Brazzaville Declaration on Noncommunicable Diseases Prevention and Control in the WHO African Region
Noncommunicable Diseases quarterly bulletin - Issue 1
Other relevant documents
Save the date
ICPPA 2025 – Call to Action
We, the participants of the Second International Conference on PEN-Plus in Africa:
Recognize
the immense burden of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) across Africa, particularly severe and chronic NCDs affecting children and individuals under 40 in poor socioeconomic conditions, with grave implications for health systems, human capital, and economic development.
Acknowledge
that despite improvements in life expectancy, child survival, and access to health services, inequities persist—especially in managing severe and chronic NCDs—resulting in preventable suffering and premature deaths.
Reaffirm
that strengthened primary health care systems—integrated with NCD, maternal, child, and infectious disease programmes—are foundational to achieving universal health coverage and equitable, life-saving care for severe and chronic NCDs.
Reiterate
Africa’s commitment to the PEN-Plus framework to reach underserved populations through decentralized, integrated outpatient services.
Recall and reaffirm
commitments made through:
WHO Regional PEN-Plus Strategy (2022)
Global NCD and Diabetes Compacts (2020–2030)
UNGA Political Declarations on NCDs & WHO Global Action Plan 2013–2020
Brazzaville Declaration on NCD Prevention and Control (2011)
AU Addis Ababa Communiqué on RHD (2015)
Ouagadougou Declaration on PHC & Health Systems (2010)
Sickle Cell Disease Strategy for Africa (2010)
We commit to:
Elevate severe and chronic NCDs as urgent health and development priorities.
Advance integrated early detection, diagnosis, treatment, and long-term care at all levels for severe and chronic NCDs, with emphasis on primary and first-referral care.
Promote people-centred care and multisectoral collaboration to reduce premature mortality from severe and chronic NCDs.
We call on Governments to:
Fully implement PEN and PEN-Plus interventions to expand equitable access to essential services for severe and chronic NCDs in collaboration with WHO and Partners.
Uphold and finance the PEN and PEN-Plus regional strategies, ensuring access to care for individuals with severe and chronic NCDs—regardless of geography or socioeconomic status.
Strengthen national health systems, improve surveillance and data capturing for severe and chronic NCDs and ensure availability of affordable essential medicines and diagnostics, and institutionalize prevention and care.
Demonstrate strong leadership in public health by increasing domestic investment, and fostering inclusive partnerships with civil society, development partners, and the private sector.
Integrate WHOPEN and PEN Plus conditions into UHC package to alleviate the burden of NCDs on the most vulnerable populations.
We urge WHO to:
Intensify its leadership, advocacy, and convening role with Partners, Governments and the Private Sector to keep severe and chronic NCDs and Universal Health Coverage at the centre of political and development agendas.
Leverage their strength in normative functions to develop standards, tools and guidance documents to support the implementation of the PEN Plus Framework in Africa.
Support resource mobilization, promote innovations and facilitate cross-country learning and coordination.
Leverage existing collaboration with UN Agencies to address severe and chronic NCDs in children.
We call on Development Partners, Donors and the Private Sector to:
Increase investment in children and vulnerable populations with severe and chronic NCDs.
Promote innovation and local production of affordable health technologies.
We respectfully request:
The WHO Regional Director for Africa to present this Call-to-Action to the 75th Session of the WHO Regional Committee for Africa and the 2025 High-Level Meeting of the UN General Assembly in September.
African governments to champion this Call-to-Action at the 2025 UN General Assembly High-Level Meeting to galvanize global commitment and secure greater investments for severe and chronic NCDs.
We express our sincere appreciation to the Federal Republic of Nigeria for hosting ICPPA 2025 and to all partners and donors for their continued support.
Media
ICPPA is keen on engaging members of the press and encourages their involvement. If you wish to arrange for interviews ahead of ICPPA 2025 or have any other media inquiries, please contact the WHO Regional Office for Africa.
ICPPA Communications
Email:
ICPPA@who.int
​​​​​​​
5 June 2025