Enhancing Vaccine Storage Efficiencies in Africa – Africa CDC
Skip to content
Email:
communications@africacdc.org
Search
Search
News
/
Press Releases
Enhancing Vaccine Storage Efficiencies in Africa
8 February 2024,
The Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), in collaboration with the Mastercard Foundation under the Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative, has provided state-of-the-art cold chain equipment to five (5) African Union Member States.  These Member States are Botswana, Cameroon, Sierra Leone, Uganda and Zambia, are part of the initial delivery targeting a total of 32 Member States in the phase one investment for the procurement of Cold Chain Equipment (CCE). The equipment was procured and delivered through the support of UNICEF, one of the initiative’s implementing partners. The support aligns with the Africa CDC goal of strengthening healthcare systems and enhancing the response to vaccine-preventable diseases.
The cumulative equipment across the five (5) Member States, which consists of 465 refrigerators and freezers, 1,150 temperature monitors, 5,253 vaccine carriers and cold boxes, and 2 cold rooms, all valued up to USD 3.3 million, will significantly enhance the healthcare infrastructure and capabilities. The equipment is designed to efficiently manage vaccines and vital medical supplies, supporting the expansion of COVID-19 vaccination and other programs, including routine Immunization, which aims to ensure safe and effective vaccines reach every child. By expanding the cold chain storage capacity, the Ministries of Health will be able to offer a more comprehensive vaccination program and improve vaccine coverage rates.
H.E Dr. Jean Kaseya, the Africa CDC Director General, emphasizes the significant benefits of this equipment in minimizing vaccine wastage due to temperature fluctuations. “This optimization allows the Ministries of Health to allocate healthcare budgets more effectively and allocate resources to other critical areas of healthcare. The availability of CCE facilitates extensive immunization activities, reaching remote and underserved communities. This, in turn, leads to improved vaccine coverage rates, reducing the prevalence of vaccine-preventable diseases, including COVID-19, and strengthening health security in Africa towards attaining global health security,” Dr Kaseya said.
The provision of Cold Chain Equipment is crucial in preserving vaccines and maintaining the efficacy of temperature-sensitive medical supplies. The addition of freezers and refrigerators enables member states to store a wider range of vaccines, including those requiring ultra-low temperatures like COVID-19. This expansion of cold chain storage is essential to pandemic preparedness and will enable member states to offer more comprehensive vaccination programs.
The cold boxes and vaccine carriers provide reliable transportation while maintaining the recommended vaccine temperature, ensuring vaccine efficacy and safety. This feature increases geographic coverage and contributes to improved immunization service delivery and health security in Africa by enhancing the capacity of Ministries of Health to manage vaccines and strengthen their cold chain systems.
During the handover ceremony in Zambia, the Honorable Sylvia Masebo, the Minister of Health of the Republic of Zambia, highlighted that the support from Afric a CDC aligns with Zambia’s goals to have readily available life-saving vaccines and strengthened cold chain capacity, and the Ministry will seek more equipment to build on the gains made, while implementing the integration of COVID-19 vaccines into primary healthcare services.
The Africa CDC, Mastercard Foundation, and UNICEF anticipate the successful installation and efficient use of these CCEs in healthcare facilities, positively catalyzing and strengthening the healthcare landscape in the Member States. With this support, the Ministries of Health are better positioned to respond effectively to public health emergencies, ensuring equitable access to vaccines and treatments. The support provided by the Africa CDC and the Mastercard Foundation demonstrates their commitment to strengthening healthcare systems in Africa. It underscores the importance of collective collaboration in addressing global health challenges and ensuring vaccine equity for Africa.
For more information:
Dr Merawi Aragaw| Head of Division for Surveillance and Disease Intelligence | Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention| African Union| email: merawia@africa-union.org| M: +251912611294 Website: www.africacdc.org| Addis Ababa| Ethiopia|
Facebook
|
Twitter
For media inquiry:
For media enquiries please contact:
Dorothy Njagi
| Senior Communication Officer- Communication & Public Information directorate | Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention| African Union| email: email:
njagid@africacdc.org
| Website: www.africacdc.org| Addis Ababa| Ethiopia|
Facebook
|
Twitter
About Africa CDC
The Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) is a continental autonomous Public Health agency of the African Union which supports Member States in their efforts to strengthen health systems and improve surveillance, emergency response, prevention and control of diseases. For more information, visit
https://africacdc.org/
About the Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative
The Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative is a USD 1.5 million partnership between the Mastercard Foundation and the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) that aims to ensure vaccine equity for Africa by purchasing vaccines for more than 65 million people, supporting in the delivery of vaccinations to millions more, and integrating the covid-19 vaccine into routine immunization in Africa. The initiative supports and contributes to the Foundation’s Young Africa Works strategy, which seeks to enable 30 million young people, particularly young women, to access dignified and fulfilling work by 2030. For more information on the Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative, please visit:
https://africacdc.org/saving-lives-and-livelihoods/
8 February 2024
Theme
Medical Supplies and Cold Chain Equipment
Region
Central Africa
,
Eastern Africa
,
Northern Africa
,
Southern Africa
,
Western Africa
Country
Botswana
,
Cameroon
,
Sierra Leone
,
Uganda
,
Zambia
Related Content
Media Advisory
Weekly Special Press Briefing on Health Emergencies in Africa
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 14 – 20 July 2025
Press Releases
Africa Launches Continental Strategy to Decentralize Diagnostics and Accelerate Outbreak Response
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 7 – 13 July 2025
Press Releases
Malawi Launches Second Edition of Pathogen Genomic Surveillance Strategy and Implementation Plan
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 30 June-6 July 2025
Follow Us
Twitter
Linkedin
Facebook-f
Youtube
Flickr
Instagram
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.
Ok