PRESS STATEMENT: Africa CDC committed to supporting the replenishment of Gavi funds in Paris – Africa CDC
Skip to content
Email:
communications@africacdc.org
Search
Search
News
/
Statement
PRESS STATEMENT: Africa CDC committed to supporting the replenishment of Gavi funds in Paris
Addis Ababa, 9 June
– The Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC) is the continental public health agency mandated to support African member states in building robust and resilient health systems. Its mission is to safeguard Africa’s health security and accelerate the achievement of universal health coverage.
Africa CDC’s strategic focus is on three critical priorities: (1) outbreak and pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response; (2) health systems strengthening, with an emphasis on primary health care and community health; and (3) effective local manufacturing of health commodities, including vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics.
Africa CDC recognizes Gavi as a pivotal partner for health security and collective resilience to vaccine-preventable diseases across the continent. Indeed, from 2000 to 2022, Gavi invested US$11.9 billion to enhance access to life-saving vaccines in Africa, resulting in 11.1 million future deaths averted in Africa.
This week, the Gavi Board approved the Gavi Alliance’s new five-year strategy (2026-2030), focusing on accelerating vaccine coverage, introducing new vaccines, strengthening health systems for equity, and supporting global health security and regional vaccine manufacturing. As a public-private partnership, Gavi is funded through replenishment events hosted by donor governments to mobilize support from governments, philanthropies, the private sector, various institutions, civil society organizations, and individuals.In a show of commitment and support as the continent is the primary beneficiary of Gavi funds, Africa CDC and the African Union and African member states stand ready to fully support the 2024 replenishment event hosted by France in Paris on June 20th.
This 2024 replenishment meeting will be unique, highlighting Gavi’s support for Africa’s crucial agenda of local manufacturing, as endorsed by African Heads of State under the Africa CDC’s Platform for Harmonized Health Manufacturing in Africa (PHAHM). Indeed, Gavi will unveil a groundbreaking US$1 billion commitment over ten years through a new initiative called the African Vaccine Manufacturing Accelerator (AVMA), aimed at bolstering African health security and sovereignty. At the Gavi Board meeting on June 7th, the Director General of Africa CDC, H.E. Dr Jean Kaseya, underscored the importance of respectful partnership and collaboration, stating, “Local manufacturing is the second independence of Africa because it impacts our health security and economic growth.
Additionally, Africa CDC will spearhead the Lusaka agenda to strengthen national leadership and partner coordination for effective implementation of the One Plan, One Budget, and One M&E Framework.
“In recognition of AVMA’s significance to Africa, Dr. Kaseya announced that the popular launch of AVMA will occur on African soil in the coming weeks. This momentous occasion will bring together African leaders, Gavi, donors and partners, African Civil Society Organizations, and communities to reflect on and celebrate the journey toward Africa’s self-reliance in manufacturing vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics.Together, we stand on the brink of a new era for Africa’s self-reliance in health security, driven by innovation, partnership, and a shared vision for a safer, healthier, and more prosperous Africa.
About Africa CDC:
The Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (AfricaCDC) is the African Union’s continental autonomous public health agency that supports member states in strengthening health systems and improving surveillance, emergency response, and prevention and control of diseases. Learn more at:
https://africacdc.org
Media Contact
Margaret Edwin, Director of Communication & Public Information Division: Africa CDC Tel: +251 986 632 878 | Email:
EdwinM@africacdc.org
9 June 2024
Theme
AVMA
Region
Central Africa
,
Eastern Africa
,
Northern Africa
,
Southern Africa
,
Western Africa
Tags
AVMA
Related Content
Media Advisory
Weekly Special Press Briefing on Health Emergencies in Africa
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 14 – 20 July 2025
Press Releases
Africa Launches Continental Strategy to Decentralize Diagnostics and Accelerate Outbreak Response
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 7 – 13 July 2025
Press Releases
Malawi Launches Second Edition of Pathogen Genomic Surveillance Strategy and Implementation Plan
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 30 June-6 July 2025
Follow Us
Twitter
Linkedin
Facebook-f
Youtube
Flickr
Instagram
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.
Ok