Africa CDC & WHO welcome UK’s support to address health challenges – Africa CDC
Skip to content
Email:
communications@africacdc.org
Search
Search
News
/
Statement
Africa CDC & WHO welcome UK’s support to address health challenges
The Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (
Africa CDC
), The World Health Organization Regional Office for Africa (
WHO AFRO
), and the WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean (
WHO EMRO
) extend their profound appreciation to the United Kingdom government for the recent
announcement
of its transformative commitment to enhancing global health made during the 78
th
session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). The United Kingdom’s dedication to addressing the world’s most pressing health challenges through research, development, and collaboration is both commendable and inspiring.
The allocation of the United Kingdom’s investment of £95 million in tackling deadly diseases in Africa Programme II, will foster partnerships with countries and Africa-based organizations — Africa CDC and WHO — to detect and address future epidemics, combat drug-resistant infections, and address climate-related health challenges. Such collaborative efforts are essential in building stronger health systems and ensuring a more secure future for all.
We also commend the allocation of up to £103.5 million for the development of affordable vaccines and health products, along with initiatives to combat the spread of infectious diseases, particularly during pandemics, as a demonstration of the United Kingdom’s leadership in the field of global health. This investment will undoubtedly contribute to safeguarding the health and well-being of populations worldwide, preventing future outbreaks, and ultimately saving lives.
The commitment to protecting women’s sexual and reproductive health is a crucial step towards achieving a more equitable and inclusive world. By reducing preventable deaths and improving access to care, the United Kingdom is actively working to realize the Sustainable Development Goals and the African Union Agenda 2063 in promoting the well-being of all, regardless of geographic location.
The United Kingdom’s support for research and development in low- and middle-income countries, including advancements in drug administration methods, showcases a commitment to reaching even the most remote areas with life-saving care. This approach aligns with the principles of inclusivity and resilience that are fundamental to the global health agenda.
The commitment to health security by the United Kingdom through international development is evident in its track record of investing in research, development, and healthcare infrastructure. The impact of these efforts, from malaria treatments to diagnostics for drug-resistant tuberculosis, has been significant and has undoubtedly saved countless lives.
We would like to express our deep appreciation for the United Kingdom’s resolute dedication to advancing global health. Their commitment to research, innovation, and international cooperation increases optimism for a healthier and more prosperous world.
We look forward to continued collaboration and progress in achieving our shared global health objectives.
H.E. Dr Jean Kaseya Director General Africa CDC
Dr Matshidiso Moeti WHO Regional Director for Africa
Dr Ahmed Al Mandhari WHO Regional Director for Eastern Mediterranean
2 October 2023
Region
Central Africa
,
Eastern Africa
,
Northern Africa
,
Southern Africa
Tags
Health Security
Related Content
Media Advisory
Weekly Special Press Briefing on Health Emergencies in Africa
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 14 – 20 July 2025
Press Releases
Africa Launches Continental Strategy to Decentralize Diagnostics and Accelerate Outbreak Response
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 7 – 13 July 2025
Press Releases
Malawi Launches Second Edition of Pathogen Genomic Surveillance Strategy and Implementation Plan
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 30 June-6 July 2025
Follow Us
Twitter
Linkedin
Facebook-f
Youtube
Flickr
Instagram
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.
Ok