High-level event kicks off expansion of strategic EU-AU partnership, pledging joint commitments to strengthen Global Health and African Health Sovereignty – Africa CDC
Skip to content
Email:
communications@africacdc.org
Search
Search
News
/
Press Releases
High-level event kicks off expansion of strategic EU-AU partnership, pledging joint commitments to strengthen Global Health and African Health Sovereignty
Brussels, March 19, 2024 –
The African Union Commission (AUC) and the European Union hosted a High-level Conference marking the expansion of the strategic EU-AU health partnership. The AU delegation was led by the AUC, the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), and the African Union Development Agency (AUDA-NEPAD). The EU delegation was led by the Belgian Presidency of the European Council and the European Commission.
Building on the health commitments of the 6th EU-AU Summit and outcomes of the Addis Ababa AU-EU High-level dialogue, the AU and EU expanded collaboration in priority areas of common interest in the New Public Health Order and the EU Global Health Strategy, such as strengthening pandemic prevention, preparedness and response, One Health, AMR, digital health, climate and health. This collaboration is a positive example of the AU-EU partnership to support global health in multilateral fora. Enhancing equitable access to safe, qualitive, effective and affordable health services and products and national sovereignty will be key to reach SDG-targets such as achieving Universal Health Coverage. Therefore, it is crucial to support social protection systems which incorporate social health protection, aiming at gradually granting universal health coverage as well as at providing income security in case of sickness. The AU and EU further stressed the importance of the health sector in the creation of jobs and growth. They also expressed their commitment to conclude negotiations on a pandemic agreement and International Health Regulations by the May 2024 World Health Assembly.
Most African countries are struggling to ensure sustainable and equitable access to the health products needed to meet the continent’s priority health needs. At the same time, the EU has expertise in health as well as manufacturing and access, including regulation of health products and has set out clear targets in supporting human development in its international partnerships.
With this High-level conference, the EU engages in continued technical collaboration on health in Africa and investments in strengthening Africa’s health security architecture. The EU’s Global Gateway strategy will be key to deliver on these commitments, notably through Team Europe Initiatives, increasing the resilience of European and African health systems in response to the rapidly shifting health burden, social protection, the impact of climate change and emerging health threats while considering innovative science, sharing of technical expertise and knowledge (as well as multi-stakeholder commitments).
The Belgian Presidency and the European Commission will follow up on the high-level conference in the European Council and in the governing bodies of the EU’s international cooperation instruments, aligned with shared interests and ambitions of European and African partners.
African Union Commissioner for Health, Humanitarian Affairs and Social Development,
H.E. Amb. Minata Samate Cessouma
“
The establishment of the African Medicines Agency (AMA) marks a crucial step forward in safeguarding health security on the continent by ensuring the availability and the accessibility of quality pharmaceutical products. This availability and accessibility facilitate prevention strategies and rapid responses to health emergencies, strengthening regulatory capacities and promoting regional cooperation and harmonisation of standards. By harmonising regulatory processes and promoting access to effectual medical products, the AMA can significantly enhance public health outcomes and promote sustainable development in Africa, as envisioned in the Africa Health Strategy (2016-2030) and the African Union Agenda 2063. AMA is also envisioned to bolster research and development efforts within the continent, fostering innovation and self-reliance in addressing health challenges specific to the continent. Looking to the future, the African Union Commission is enthusiastic about knowledge-sharing between the European Union and Africa to leverage the experience of establishing the European Mediines Agency to chart guidance and regulatory pathways for the development and approval of new manufacturing technologies and processes.
Belgian Minister of Development Cooperation and Major Cities,
H.E. Caroline GENNEZ
“
The EU and Africa express a shared vision of health as the precondition for social development. African countries have extensive experience in the containment of epidemics; European countries have some of the best and most accessible healthcare in the world. Global health is an area in which the EU offers added value as a partner to Africa based on its expertise and experience. Europe bolsters its international partnerships by focusing on its unique selling proposition. Our cooperation on this front will improve health outcomes for countless of people, in Africa and Europe. Our focus will be on building affordable, available and high-quality healthcare systems.
”
European Commissioner for International Partnerships,
H.E. Jutta URPILAINEN
“
Learning the lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic, the AU and the EU are committed to advance health systems and strengthen health capacities globally. This joint commitment was well reflected in the Global Gateway investment package, which we presented at the AU-EU Summit of 2022. We are proud of the results achieved in increasing local manufacturing of medicines and vaccines in Africa, for Africa. Today we launch three major Team Europe Initiatives on health security, digital health and public health institutes, and strengthen cooperation between our institutions. This is another step forward to better confront evolving health challenges and to enhance the resilience of our communities.
”
European Commissioner for Health and Food Safety,
H.E. Stella KYRIAKIDES
“
An ever-closer partnership between the African Union and the European Union is indispensable for public health. We want to work more closely with our African partners on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response, One Health and anti-microbial resistance, as well as the health effects of climate change. These are core objectives for our EU Global Health Strategy and the foundations of our cooperation with the African continent. We are now at a critical stage of the negotiations on the pandemic agreement and the international health regulations, with which we would provide new multilateral solutions to common challenges. The EU is committed to conclude the negotiations by May, a responsibility equally shared by all nations. I am pleased that the African Union and EU are joining voices and taking concrete steps to support global health internationally.
”
Africa CDC Director General,
H.E Dr Jean Kaseya
“As we navigate the complexities of global health, Africa is on the path towards self-sufficiency through equitable access to medical products. Africa’s target of producing 60% of vaccines by 2040 through the Africa CDC underscores our commitment to health sovereignty. Through strategic partnerships like the EU-AU collaboration, we accelerate our capabilities, leveraging expertise and resources to build resilient health systems and strengthen Pandemic preparedness.”
Specific outcomes of the high-level conference include the following concrete engagements:
Working Arrangement between Africa CDC and the European Commission to best implement the expanded strategic AU-EU Health partnership;
The European Commission and the Belgian Presidency announced additional TEI MAV+ funding for the advancement of the African Medicines Agency;
The announcement of procurement commitments by Global Health Initiatives to buy in Africa for Africa;
Three additional Team Europe Initiatives on health were launched: Health Security using a One Health approach, Digital Health, and Public Health Institutes;
The Team Europe Initiative (TEI) on Social Protection was launched;
Work product leads for Team Europe and Team Africa were confirmed;
A new programme ‘SafeBirth Africa’ to support improved access to innovative life-saving commodities for sexual and reproductive health in Africa. The programme will be implemented by Unitaid and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), supported by a financial contribution of €20 million from the EU budget under the Team Europe Initiative on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights that was launched in Kigali in December 2022;
An expanded AU-EU High Level Steering Meeting (HLSM) at DG-level will jointly oversee regional heath TEIs.
-END-
Media inquiry:
Communication and Public Information Directorate| Africa CDC | Email:
Communications@africacdc.org
20 March 2024
Theme
New Public Health Order
,
Respectful Partnership
Region
Central Africa
,
Eastern Africa
,
Northern Africa
,
Southern Africa
,
Western Africa
Related Content
Media Advisory
Weekly Special Press Briefing on Health Emergencies in Africa
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 14 – 20 July 2025
Press Releases
Africa Launches Continental Strategy to Decentralize Diagnostics and Accelerate Outbreak Response
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 7 – 13 July 2025
Press Releases
Malawi Launches Second Edition of Pathogen Genomic Surveillance Strategy and Implementation Plan
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 30 June-6 July 2025
Follow Us
Twitter
Linkedin
Facebook-f
Youtube
Flickr
Instagram
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.
Ok