Africa CDC and Mastercard Foundation launch phase 2 of the Saving Lives and Livelihoods (SLL) initiative to strengthen Africa’s public health systems – Africa CDC
Skip to content
Email:
communications@africacdc.org
Search
Search
News
/
Press Releases
Africa CDC and Mastercard Foundation launch phase 2 of the Saving Lives and Livelihoods (SLL) initiative to strengthen Africa’s public health systems
November 28, 2023,
Lusaka
– The Africa CDC and the Mastercard Foundation have entered a new phase of their partnership on the Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative in the aftermath of WHO’s declaration of the end of COVID-19 pandemic as a public health emergency of international concern. The Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative, a bold and unprecedented $1.5 billion partnership, was launched in June 2021. This innovative and ground-breaking partnership aimed to purchase COVID-19 vaccines, roll out vaccinations, build the vaccine manufacturing workforce for the continent, and strengthen the Africa CDC to ensure long-term health security for Africa.
Unprecedented in scale, speed and inclusion of African organisations, the partnership has
contributed to the continent’s current vaccination rate of 53 per cent of
the target population, up from just 3 per cent at the start of the initiative. The partnership has also trained, equipped, and deployed 38,000 health workers, creating a robust frontline in safeguarding public health locally. It has provided job opportunities for 23,000 individuals and integrated over 600 COVID-19 vaccination centres into healthcare systems. Additionally, this initiative led to the expansion of genomic testing capabilities from seven to 40 laboratories across the continent.
The review of Phase 1 of this initiative, among fifteen implementing partners across 29 countries, conducted by Deloitte, indicates that the vast majority of funds disbursed were used effectively and as intended. Likewise, ongoing monitoring by KPMG has confirmed that partners not only showed strength in programmatic results but also improved the institutional capacity for greater sustainability and institutional resilience.
“Our Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative with the Mastercard Foundation has shown the power of respectful and action-oriented partnerships rooted in collaboration, coordination and systems strengthening. The experience and learnings from Phase I will enable us to move with greater speed and scale to deliver with accelerated impact to our member states” said
Dr. Jean Kaseya, Director General of the Africa CDC
.
In its second phase, the partnership will expand its scope and scale, focusing on completing the vaccination of healthcare workers and vulnerable groups, building a robust workforce of community health workers, ensuring pandemic preparedness by bolstering national public health institutions, laboratory capacities, data access and quality, local manufacturing of vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics, and continuing strengthening of Africa CDC.
“While the global pandemic may be declared over, the need to continue investing in our health systems, build our workforce and prepare for future pandemics remains urgent. This partnership will ensure that we have strong health institutions and systems. We aim to enable thousands of young people to build their careers in healthcare and contribute to improving lives in Africa,” said
Reeta Roy, President, and CEO of the Mastercard Foundation.
The Saving Lives and Livelihoods initiative stands out as a testament to the power of African-led health solutions. As it progresses to its next phase, partnerships will continue to play a crucial role in shaping a New Public Health Order for Africa. Africa CDC and the Mastercard Foundation remain committed to improving the health and well-being of all Africans.
-ENDS-
About the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC)
Africa CDC is a continental autonomous health agency of the African Union established to support public health initiatives of Member States and strengthen the capacity of their public health institutions to detect, prevent, control, and respond quickly and effectively to disease threats. For more information, please visit:
https://africacdc.org
About the Mastercard Foundation
The Mastercard Foundation is a registered Canadian charity and one of the largest foundations in the world. It works with visionary organisations to advance education and financial inclusion, enabling young people in Africa and Indigenous youth in Canada to access dignified and fulfilling work. Established in 2006 through the generosity of Mastercard when it became a public company, the Foundation is an independent organisation separate from the company, with offices in Toronto, Kigali, Accra, Nairobi, Kampala, Lagos, Dakar, and Addis Ababa. Its policies, operations, and program decisions are determined by the Foundation’s Board of Directors and leadership. For more information on the Foundation, please visit
www.mastercardfdn.org
.
Media contacts:
Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention
Ms. Ndahafa Nakwafila
Ag. Head Communication and Public Information
NakwafilaN@africa-union.org|
Communications@africacdc.org
|
Facebook
|
Twitter
Mastercard Foundation
Wariko Kabuga-Waita
Senior Director, Corporate Communications
wwaita@mastercardfdn.org
28 November 2023
Theme
Saving Lives and Livelihoods
Region
Central Africa
,
Eastern Africa
,
Northern Africa
,
Southern Africa
,
Western Africa
Related Content
Déclaration d’Africa CDC sur l’Accord de Paix entre le Gouvernement de la RDC et l’Alliance du Fleuve Congo/M23
Statement
Africa CDC Statement on the Peace Agreement Between the Government of the DRC and the Congo River Alliance/M23
Media Advisory
Weekly Special Press Briefing on Health Emergencies in Africa
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 14 – 20 July 2025
Press Releases
Africa Launches Continental Strategy to Decentralize Diagnostics and Accelerate Outbreak Response
Weekly Briefs
Africa CDC Weekly Brief | 7 – 13 July 2025
Follow Us
Twitter
Linkedin
Facebook-f
Youtube
Flickr
Instagram
We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.
Ok